From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number 76. Recorded Friday,
July 27th, 2007. Support for Hanselman it's
as provided by Tellerik already
controls the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net
developers journal, the world's leading
dotnet developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott talks
about F sharp with Robert
Pickering. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman, and this is another
episode of Hansel minutes, and
we are fortunate enough to
be sitting down today with
Robert Pickering, the author of
the foundations of F sharp
book. And I'm in Portland.
Robert, you are aware right
now I'm in Sandra Manoli
Paris, France. Oh, wow. Well,
Robert, I really appreciate you
coming on the show. I,
I had mentioned F sharp
in your book on a,
on a recent show and
you emailed me and said,
thanks for the mention. And
I was just thrilled to
hear from you to be
able to get you to
come on and talk about
I'm about 280 pages through
the book. Haven't quite made
it to the very, very
end, but I'm enjoying it.
If you could share with
the, with the, the listeners,
why F sharp to start.
Okay. Well, it's, it's a
very interesting question because that
shops a general purpose programming
language. So in a sense,
it is kind of competing
against the, the she shops
and the vb.net. So this
world, which might seem a
bit kind of crazy given
the small number of people
that use it. But I
think the.net platform has sort
of gives us is a
bit of a lever in
that way. And the, any
library written in C sharp,
you can also use some
dotnet. So it gives you
a lot more broader scope.
Now, do you think that
it's going to get a
bad rap because it's a
functional programming language? I mean,
I know it's not a
pure functional language, like maybe
a Haskell, is that, would
that be a fair statement?
I think some people might
perceive it that way, but
I think a lot More
people are taking an interest
in functional programming. Cause a
lot of the features that
are being introduced to C-sharp
the next version of C-sharp
are, are ideas taken from
functional programming? Like I know
generics was, is very popular,
was a very popular feature
in the framework 2.0, and
that's an idealized lifted from
a functional programming. I know
it sort of also looks
a bit like C plus
plus templates, but I think
the idea of type premise
hesitation very much comes from
functional programming. So I think
that sort of thing is
sort of making people sit
up and say, Hey, we
should maybe take a close
look at this functional programming.
I think that's one of
the, the aims of the
shop project is to let
people that maybe, maybe haven't
had so much exposure to
functional programming on a pro
Morenci sharp, and just give
them some exposure to that.
And also to try and
drawing some people that have
maybe done some folk pro
man, Oh, camel or scale
or language just like that.
And maybe wouldn't have otherwise
thought of looking@thedotnetframeworkandlettingthemlookatthe.net framework and
seeing you see what a
nice environment Would you say
that that F sharp is,
is an, is an actual
functional primary language like Oak
Kamler Haskell, or is it
like more FP, like, like
lists, let's say How much
of functional programming language like,
Oh, come on. I mean,
D I do have I've
shopped started out to do,
being, to do and overcome
light language on the.net framework.
And I mean, it still
is very much like come,
but is, is also joined
influences from other languages, like
less than half scale and
even C sharp in some
ways, because the object system
it uses is very much
like the a C sharp
object system. Can you help
me put my finger and
maybe the listeners finger on
what it means to be
a functional programming language? I
don't think everyone who is
listening necessarily went to university
or paid attention in the
functional programming portion of university.
And would it be useful
to understand, at least from
your perspective, what is the
definition? When is the language
become a functional programming language?
Is it about the statelessness
and if so, what does
that mean? Okay. We'll tend
to focus on the statelessness
of the functional pro languages
and in a pure sense
that, I guess that is
what, when people say functional
program language, that they really
mean something that is stainless.
And I guess that really
means that a function has
takes its parameters. It's transforms
those premises into new values
and returns those values. So
it doesn't have any side
effects. It doesn't alter global,
it's not returning the variables
that the parameters it's taken
altered, it's taken a fresh
copy of those premises. So
everything's done in a read
only stateless manner. But for
me, I don't think that's
the, the really important aspect
of the language. I think
perhaps one of the most
important ones aspects of Ash
shop is that, well, there's
two actually, there's that? Oh,
all right. These are all
functions in the language are
also values. So that means
that you can pass a
function to another function, has
a parameter. And I mean,
that doesn't sound incredibly interesting
in itself, but it does
mean that you can do
some really nice things in
terms of abstracting fro control
or unrefined from your code
to be a lot tighter
and more concise by obstructing
flow control. I mean, doing
things like, say, say you
have a list of values,
you can write a generic
function called a map to
transform that, that list of
values into another set of
values. So rather than having
to write a, say, a
four loop over the list,
and the other idea is
that the, the language is
a bit more value on
the interfaces in, and a
language like C-sharp, everything's a
statement. So it's, everything is
kind of a list of
instructions. Whereas an NAF shop,
everything is a value. So
for example, in our shop,
and if statements returns a
value, yeah, it doesn't sound
on a major thing, but
once there's a couple of
things, it was quite nice
about that. So, you know,
I only see shop say
quite often, you want to
creates a warm value, say
initialize the string to be
one value or another value
based on, let's say a
set Boolean, and you can
use an if statement to
do that in C sharp,
of course, but in C
sharp, you have to sort
of declare your value before
the, if statements and then
satisfy any, either side of
the statement. And you've got
no real guarantees that, that
that's happened by the compiler.
Whereas in a shop, you
can just say your value
equals and then have your
statements. And the compiler will
check that each side of
the expression evaluates to a
string and is assigned to,
to the, the value, the
identifier. Are there ways, I
mean, as you're saying this,
I'm trying to put it
into the context of C-sharp,
which is kind of the
language that so far in
my life is spoken by
my own DNA finds their
language. It sounds like you
found F sharp as the
one that spoke to you.
Yeah. And I'm always looking
at other languages trying to
see if maybe this'll be
this next language will be
the one that speaks to
me. So as I try
to get my brain around
F sharp, I asked, I
am asking myself, well, you
said functions are values. All
values are functions. I mean,
how was that different from
being able to pass functions
around just delegates and function
pointers and things like that?
Well, it's, it's incredibly similar
to a delegates. Actually. It's
just a bit of more
of a generic mechanism. I
think a generic, I think
delegates are incredibly useful, but
they've sort of got this
limitation that each time you
want to use a delicate,
you have to go and
define it and you get
this kind of annoying things
where you can get two
delicates with exactly the same
with signature, but they're not
quite equal. So you, you
end up defining, could end
up defining the same. Delicates
in several places that has
the same signature. It was
definitely a lot of prep
work. I know that I
never use delegates without thinking
about it ahead of time.
I always have to go
off and prepare the program
for this delegate. That's coming
along. Now that changes a
little bit with anonymous delegates,
but I get the impression
that in F sharp, you
don't give, throwing a function
around any thoughts. Yes. That's
the sort of, that's the
idea that you can do
exactly that and it, it,
it does end up making
your life easier and that
you can get quite why
I find when I'm coding
and quite often getting situations
where you've got two functions
that are very similar, but
maybe there's a bit at
the beginning. That's similar than
a bit at the end.
That's similar. And then there's
a small section in the
middle of that, that changes
now in C-sharp, that's a
little bit difficult to reflux
her into the same function
because you end up having
to put an F statement
in the middle to do
the two different things. Whereas
in app shop, you could
just make the two the
same function and have the
middle bits as a parameter.
I saw somebody blogging about
this recently, call it this,
or what do they call
it? The hole in the
middle pattern. So how does
this relate to this concept
of Curry to functions or
partial functions? Well, the idea
of code functions is, in
my opinion, it's kind of
an I Stacey feature in,
in, in functional languages. It
relates to the, the all
values being functions in that
if you, what credit function
is, if you don't pass
a function, all of its
premises at once, it will
return a function. That's kind
of waiting for its final
parameter. And that can be
quite useful in some situations,
but it's not sort of
my favorite feature. And it,
it, it does put a
few people off, I think,
just because it can seem
to, to add a bit
of extra complexity. Whereas One
of the things that I
thought was interesting if I'm
understanding this correctly, is that
the control flow concepts in
F sharper are very strong.
You can't have an F
without analysis. Is that true?
Yeah, that's a sort of
going back to what I
was talking about earlier is,
I mean, you can have
an a, an F without
an hour, but the compiler
will check that your F
statements evaluates to B units,
which is after shop's version
of voids. So, so is
it is something with a
side effects. Whereas if you
have an ALS, it will
make sure that both sides
of the Ellis clause evaluates
to be the same thing,
which is quite it's, it's
very useful for catching errors.
When you make small mistakes
in, in an F if
then else statement and L
statement, then the compiler can
type, check that for you,
which is just something you
don't get in C sharp.
So in that case, then
the, if then else kind
of construct is itself an
you know, it's an expression,
it's a, It's a value
it's by now Evaluates to
a value. And that value
must have one type. Yeah,
exactly. So then F sharp
is a strongly typed language.
It's very much strongly typed
language, but I think one
of the things I like
about it, although it's stronger
type, it's still quite concise
because, and I've shot. We
have what's called type inference
where each value has a
type, but the compiler works
out for you. So a
lot of the time you
don't have to type out
the name of the type.
The compiler will just look
at the functions you're calling
and the tools you're using
and say, okay, this should
be of this type. So,
so the strong tiredness does
not necessarily mean that you
have to figure out the
type ahead of time, like
saying, and I like in
C sharp, it's kind of
more like, C-sharp three O
where you, you know, the
type because of the way
you've written, the literal, that
type can be easily inferred.
It may look dynamic, but
ultimately you get all the
performance benefits of a statically
type language. That's exactly it
it's. Yeah. In, in, in
a shop, you have to
bind a value to an
identify, use the keyword lap,
which has a bit like
Kersey C shops, a VAR
C shop three is far
except in a shop. That's
a default. So you don't
normally write any other type
home rotations. And you can
put that in into if
you want, but that's kind
of an optional extra. If
you want to give the
compiler, if you feel you
need to give some compiler
some hence by what you're
doing. Now, one of the
things that I thought was
actually one of the part
of the book I spent
the most time looking at,
just because it took so
much brainpower to get my
head around, was the pattern
matching. Okay. Now it was,
it was very clear, but
I had to like, look
at the book very carefully
and read each word and
digest it. I kept trying
to see that. I kept
trying to see a switch
statement, but pattern matching seems
to be more than that.
Can you talk about pattern
matching and why that's unique
to F sharp? Yeah. There's
a couple of things that
were really nice about pattern
matching, get an F sharp.
I mean, it's like a
switch statement on steroids, I
guess. So, I mean, I
remember a while ago, one
of my friends asked me,
you know, why, why can't
you in C sharp, say
type off and then do
do a switch statement over
that in app shop, they
provide some syntax to, to
do exactly that. So you
can pattern much over that
type of an object. So
say you have an object.
You don't know whether it's
a string or an integer
or a float. You can
do, you can do a,
a pattern matching over that
and run different codes depending
on what the value is,
which is quite a useful
feature. And you can also
pattern match over just values.
You can sort of say
this number, if it's one,
do this, if it's to
do that, or if it's
an doing it, do another,
Oh, so, so any other
value, and this will all
be checked by the ComPilot
to, to make sure that
you have a complete set
of values. If you don't,
it will give you a
warning, which is something you
don't really get Vanessa statements
in C sharp. And also
it goes hand in hand
with another feature of F
shop, which I really liked
called union types. And union
types are interesting because they
don't really, they're not anything
to do with functional programming
per se, but they tend
to crop up a lot
in functional programming, which is,
and I'm not really much
outside them. And so the
idea of a union type
is it's a waived model.
Things are related, but to
not necessarily don't necessarily sync
strata the same structure, that
might seem slightly bizarre if
you're coming from an AOL
world where you kind of
used to build in a
hierarchy. So you start off
with an object with a
fixed number of fields of
properties, and then you can
kind of add stuff. Whereas
a union type is a
way of saying this value
will have a structure that
looks like this, or like
this I, is it like
a union And see a
union? And see, I thought
I was kind of being
like a struct, but it
was a cop out. Yeah.
I it's, it's not really
lucky union. And see, I
think, I think some of
the extensions to, to the
C language do sort of
introduce the kind of discriminating
union type, but it's kind
of quite a bizarre thing
in C When would you
know, when a what's an
appropriate example, when would you
know that a particular problem
was aching for a union
type? Well, there's a very
simple example in the base
that shop based libraries, which
I really like called the,
the option type. And this
is a union type that
has one construct called sum,
which is just of can
be of any value, but
under the construction of not
call norm, which has no
value associated with it. And
so when you'd use, this
is a places in maybe
a C shop library where
you would return no, sometimes.
So say an XML light.
If you're doing Slack for
note and success, and I've
shot. If you're building that
library now sharp would probably
return an option type, which
would return non if the
value didn't exist and then
some with the, the value
itself, if it did exist.
And then what that gives
you is a very clear
medication that you know, that
the can be two different
situations, which you don't really
get when you're returning. No,
I mean, I've seen a
lot of books in code
popup because functions do occasionally
turn rent. No. And the
program has not actually realized
that that can be the
case. And so later on
the spider use Knoll and
you get a no reference
exception. Whereas with this option
type, the program is forced
to write code for the
case where the value does
exist. And when it doesn't.
So then in, in, in
F sharp, the kind of
the kind of type that
I would use that would
feel like a structure or
a class would be a
record type. Yes. And then
the union type offers you
this extra level of flexibility.
Yeah. The, so yeah, F
sharp has record types, which
look very similar to which
are just collection of fields.
Like you get on an
objects and then this union
type is, it's just something
that you use. I guess
when I feel just doesn't
feel appropriate. I mean, another
interesting example of where a
union type is appropriate is
if you were say trying
to model a binary tree,
I think most people have
had to deal with one
of those at some points.
And it's, it's very feasible
to model light in the
language like C sharp, but
you always end up using
this idea of having no
references in some cases, which,
which can be a little
bit dangerous. Whereas in, in
app shop, you can just
say a binary tree is
made up of either a
value or a note, which
has two child notes, and
then to work with that,
you pattern match over it
so that you write code
for the case where you
have the two child nodes
on your right case where
you actually get your value.
And one of the other
things I wanted to talk
to you about was the
F sharp libraries, because as
with all languages, the power
of the language is only
as kind of exploitable as
the L the libraries underneath,
and just as Ruby has
rails and other, other extensions
to the, to Ruby that
sometimes people think of as
being part of the language,
but are really part of
the, the library. There's some
pretty interesting libraries that come
along with F sharp, particularly
around collections and sequences. Yes,
this is going back to
the, sort of the, the
map functions and the fold
functions that I was talking
about earlier. So like, I
guess it's because of this
idea of being able to
take a function as a
value, you can, you can
then take a very generic
view of the world and
say, so as a program
at one of the 10
things, we tend to spend
a lot of time doing
is working with collections. And
then there's this fixed sets
of things that you always
want to do to a
collection, like maybe a change
into another collection. So that's
a map function, and we
can, we can write a
generic function, which applies another
function to, to each value
in the list, turn it
into a different value, or
we might want to create
a summary of that list.
So we have a list
of messages we want to
total them. So we, we
get, in this case, a
generic function called a folding
function where, which takes a
function, which shows, which will
be applied to each member
of the list, and also
acute and accumulator, which will
be used to, to accumulate
the value. In the case
of making an addition, it
would, you know, your function
would just be adding the
value to the accumulator And
to be clear, these, this
list is a specific Microsoft
dot F sharp dot collections
dot list. It's not an
I list, or it's not
a, Yeah, it's, it is
a collection building to F
sharp, but it, I mean,
it does support the IEnumerable
interface. So for example, if
you, if you return an
F sharp list to a
C sharp API, you will
still be able to do
it for each over. It's
See, that gets into my
question about interoperability. If I,
if I do something in,
in F sharp that perhaps
I'm doing it enough sharp,
because it's, it's very elegant.
It's very simple. It's, it's
a natural thing to do,
moving through a matrix or
creating a list of some
kind. And then I return
it out. You know, what
kind of dependencies do I
have? And even though the
type might underlying BA and
F sharp list, it sounds
like as long as the
appropriate system dot collections interfaces
are implemented, she sharp will
never know the difference. Yeah.
I mean, you can create
very good in patrol with
a C shop. I mean,
certainly using C shop functions
from AF shop is, is
a doddle is, is very
straightforward. If you want to
create APIs that in apps
chart that look nice from
C sharp, you do have
to be a little bit
more careful because I show
up to have a few
weird types like union types,
w which don't look so
great when you return them
to C sharp. I mean,
they, they are usable from
C sharp. So what kind
of problem am I going
to want to watch for
as a developer where I
might see that problem and
say, Oh, I could do
this in a thousand lines
of C sharp, but this
kind of thing is so,
so much more easily cracked
by using F sharp. I
guess it's anything that sort
of very focused on, on
algorithm type programming or any
way, any way you have
to manipulate any kind of
tree or act shop's got
great tools for parsing text.
So any kind of passing
tax story, or even binary
data works really well in
our shop. And also if
you wanted to do sort
of language oriented programming, which
is what does that mean?
Well, it's, it's, there's a
lot of different people given
different meanings to it in
the industry, but I, I
try, I try and talk
about it in my little,
one of the latest It's
in the book. Yeah. Chapter
11 is on language oriented
prayer. That's actually the next
time I'm stuck on chapter
10 on distributed applications. Right.
Okay. But, well, I think,
I think that's one of
the strongest chapters of the
book, the, the language or
in his programming, certainly Don
Simes had hit was his
favorites. I want it basically
means in this context is,
or what, what you can
do really well have a
shop that you can't maybe
do so well in other
languages is design data structures
that looked like a little
language inside of Like a
DSL domain. It's like a
DSL, but, but yet still
in app shop still within
your programming language. One of
the really nice examples of
this is I've shot. One
of the half shot libraries
has got an argument pause
that built in. And I
don't know if you've ever
tried to write a command
line argument pausing. It's not
that difficult, but what you
tend to end up writing
is lots of in string
and just full of dirty
string manipulation, bunch of shuffling
data around and marshaling from
time to time. Whereas in
the upshot, what you do
is you just rice, a
list of pairs of values,
one of which has a
string, which is the, the
argument you're expecting. And then
the author tells you what
type of argument that should
receive. And generally you pass
a function to that to
say, what should happen when
I received this link, this
is value. So it turns,
what's usually in a lot
of nasty kind of string
manipulation into something that just
looks very, just looks like
a description of what should
happen. Now, would this be
using the, I understand that
F sharp actually has its
own Lex and yak implementations.
W that, that particular example
isn't using the, the Lexan
yak implementation, but I guess
that is another aspect of
language oriented programming. And it
does have its its own
Alexia, African fermentation, as you
say, No, we, we recently
had John Lamb from the iron
Ruby team and the DLR
combined, right? And a lot
of questions came up around.
What's a good language in
the, in the.net framework and
the dot and ecosystem really
such that one could create
a DSL. You know, Ruby
really lends itself to creating
its own DSLs. And one
of the questions from the
audience was whether or not
the DLR and or iron
Ruby would really lend itself
to creating tiny little languages.
And it sounds like F
sharp might be a better
place to start if one
were going to create their
own DSL. Yeah. I think,
I think I shot would
be a great place to
start. I mean, the company
that I worked for at
the moment lexified does a
lot of work with DSLs.
In fact, I sort of
all our products are based
around at DLS sell for,
for describing financial products, which
is actually recently. And I
came up with that it's
it could be written as
sharp it's it's using the
same kind of ideas that's
available and at shop Now,
did you have to do
anything to sell this kind
of quote unquote, sell this
idea to your company or
because you were already using
old camel, it was an
easy sell. The reason I
ask is I'm trying To
understand how, how can I,
or the, the.net oriented listener,
you know, sell an F
sharp project to their boss.
I mean, I think it's
fair to point out a
remind the listener that this
integrates nicely into visual studio,
2005, right? I mean, the
integration with visual studio 2005
isn't yet perfect. But I
mean, you do get very
good in Telesonics that works
really nicely. You get the
app shop interacts with console
is integrated into visual studio,
which what that means is
you can sort of highlight
a section of your code
as you might do with
a section of SQL that
you're icing and a press
keyboard shortcut, which is all
10, three and half shop's
case. And it goes off
and executes that code for
you. And because of the,
the, the structure of an
upshot program, it generally lends
its well. So having kind
of a little sections of
it executed on its own.
So it's great for kind
of testing your program and
it it's particularly nice when
you're working with wind WinForms
cause we can do sort
of pop up a form
and then dynamically set properties
on it, on the form
and see change and before
your eyes, which is really
quite cool. Yeah. That's interesting
that Ruby, a guy, John Lamb
did a similar demo and
it seems like more and
more people are using demos
like that as a, as
a way to kind of
show the, the usefulness of
an interactive console, that it
was pretty cool to see
him bring up a wind
format and start adding buttons
to it kind of dynamically
and in a quick prototyping
way. Yeah. Just not to
pit you guys against each
other, but I think I'd
be interested in understanding where
a dynamic languages like Byron
Python sit in the ecosystem
next to, you know, statically
typed, but very, very differently
powerful languages like F sharp
in the kind of this
new world order. Suddenly we
have a lot more to
choose from than just C
sharp and VB, almost like
the promise of.net from seven
years ago, it was really
happening. It, it, it does
feel a lot more exciting.
I have to say. I
mean, one of the reasons
that got me in Sasha
originally is when, when you
looked at the B and
C shop, I mean, I,
I really liked both of
those languages, but when you,
if you do put them
next to each other and
compare them, especially the early
versions that they were, they
were really quite similar. One
of the things that attracted
me to have shot was,
you know, you really can
see differences, different ways of
doing things. Now, one thing
we're getting towards the end
of the show here, we're
coming up on a half
an hour. But one thing
I wanted to point out
that I thought was particularly
interesting was that you actually
ported the game of life
sample to Silverlight. Yes, that's
correct. Yeah. That's Silverlight well,
it's, we'll talk Ill. So
you just referenced the correct.
Correct. Several light assemblies and
several, I didn't even know
F sharp was involved. Yes.
That's, that's pretty much it.
Yeah. You can just tell
that shop to, to use
a particular instance of the
CLR. Don, Don Simon spent
some quite a lot of
time working on that so
that the actual Ashok compiler
can be used with the
mano or the, or rotor
as well. So you've got
standard.net framework, rotor, mano, and
Silverlight. Yeah. So it's what
it's all about. Just being
able to reference the right
set of dotnet DLLs, Have
any particular work had to
be done to get that,
to work with server line
or did it just work?
It just worked. I mean,
there's a few things that
didn't, and that's, if you
touched on any methods that
existed in the.net framework 2.0,
but didn't exist in Silverlight
she got a Missy method
exception, but generally that was
quite easily booked. Cause it
just said MiFi method so-and-so
doesn't exist. And you kind
of thought, well, can't use
that API, but I mean,
it was all stuff that
you, you didn't really want
to use, like closing, shutting
down the application because obviously
that's not very desirable and
enterprise. Well I've really, I
am really enjoying your book
foundations of F sharp. It's
one of the yellow and
black books from a press.
And I got to get
through chapter 10 and move
on to chapter 11 on
the DSL in language oriented
programming. What would be a
good way for the, for
the listener to start with
F sharp. I know this
that Don and team just
released a, a new version
of F sharp kind of
on the heels of all
of the different releases this
week F sharp. I think
it's 1.9 0.2 0.7 with
a number of new new
language features and such. And
it integrates again nicely with,
with visual studio. So you
don't feel like you're out
there at the command line
and all alone with notepad,
but what's a good project
for someone to sit down
with and kind of get
their brain around this. I
see. That's a very good
question. Well, I think at
shops distributed with a lot
of samples, I guess I
could ways to take a
look at the samples available,
the game's lifetime pool that
you, you mentioned earlier as
one of the, the most
offense that comes with the,
the compiler itself and otherwise,
you know, there's, there's various
other ones. And another, another
good way would be, I
guess, to Talk to the
people on the, the hub
act shop has its own
community sites started by a
guy called options. Scalper. Where
is that? So, so that's
CS points, hope S all
one word.net.net. All right. And
I'll post that link up
on the, up on the
show website. Yep. Fantastic. Well,
I really appreciate your taking
the time to call her.
Okay. No problem. It was,
it was really nice to
speak to you. I do
appreciate it. This has been
another episode of Hanselminutes and
we'll see you next week.